A Clear and Concise Description of the Practice of Śamatha

by Khenpo Pema Vajra

Homage to the guru!

I prostrate to the buddhas and their bodhisattva heirs, who, like a sun of Dharma,Dispel entirely
the darkness of confusion among beings of the three realms,With the brilliant rays that
shine from the sun of their perfect wisdom,Drawn by the chariot-like winds of their great
compassionate love.

This is the lineage of the Lion of the Śākyas, the supreme sage,The three scriptural collections,
a perfect path of unerring teachings,Brought together into an approach a single practitioner
can followAnd put into practice, in the tradition of the wise and learned masters.


I will now in brief describe the way to take up this noble path,Which takes as its foundation
moral discipline that is perfectly pure,So that on the basis of supremely peaceful, one-pointed
concentration,One may gain the supreme wisdom, entirely free from any flaw.

Any intelligent individual with a sincere wish to pursue liberation must take up the only genuine
approach that can bring this about, the precious teaching of the buddhas. The way these
teachings are taken up is as follows. First one must rely upon an exceptional and learned
spiritual friend as a guide, and through studying his or her instructions, cut through
any misconceptions about the three sections of the scriptures. Then one must apply the three
trainings in higher realization to one’s own mind and put them into practice in the sequence
described by the great master Vasubandhu:

Observing discipline, and having heard and contemplated the teachings,One applies oneself intensively
to meditation.[1]

As this says, at first one must practise ethical restraint through the pure moral discipline
of renunciation, which is the foundation of all qualities, and then through study and reflection
on the stages of the path to be practised, one thoroughly trains one’s mind and embarks
upon the actual path of meditation itself. Regarding the main practice of the path,
the glorious Nāgārjuna said:

Without meditative concentration, there can be no wisdom,And without wisdom, there can be no
meditative concentration,So by taking up these two together, the great ocean of saṃsāraBecomes
inconsequential, like a drop of water in a hoof-print.

As this says, through the approach that unites meditation and wisdom, or śamatha and vipaśyanā,
one is able to find liberation from the ocean of saṃsāric existence and progress along
the path of peace. The logic behind this and the sequence in which they are to be practised
is explained by Śāntideva:

Knowing that the mind’s afflictions are overcomeThrough penetrating insight suffused with stable
calm,You should first seek the peace of calm abiding,Which is found in joy and non-attachment
for the world.[2]

As this says, unless one has the stability of the mind of calm abiding, one will never gain
the wisdom of vipaśyanā, so in the beginning one must cultivate śamatha. When doing so, first
one develops the ‘one-pointed mind of the desire realm’ in which the grosser level of
thoughts and distractions related to the level of the desire realm are all pacified. Then
one gradually accomplishes the four dhyāna meditations corresponding to the levels of the
form realm and the four absorptions of the formless realm. These nine stages corresponding
to the nine levels of the three realms are known as ‘worldly meditations’ or ‘childish concentrations,’
and they provide the foundation for the supermundane path. Then there is the
absorption of cessation, which is attained only through the supermundane path, and is added
to these eight form and formless absorptions, to make nine in all, known collectively
as ‘the nine successive absorptions’, because they must be entered sequentially, one after
another.

This is the actual main practice of meditative concentration or samādhi. In addition, there
are also the common samādhis, such as the three liberations, ten totalities, eight spheres
of dominant perception, five supercognitions and so on, which are developed with a mind of
the form and formless stages through specific mental activity on the various levels. One
should know that all the samādhis of the supermundane path in general and those of the noble
bodhisattvas in particular—the illusion-like samādhi, warrior-faring samādhi, vajra-like
samādhi and so on—as well as mnemonic retention, confidence and all the infinite gateways
to liberation, are nothing other than variations of the samādhi in which śamatha and vipaśyanā
are united.

Once these general points have been understood, we come to the actual instruction on how to
meditate. Leaving busyness and ordinary interaction behind, in a solitary environment, begin
by generating a mind of renunciation and bodhicitta. Then visualize in the sky before you
all the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions, and once you have performed the
seven branches as a means of purification and gathering the accumulations, pray one-pointedly
that you may develop pure samādhi. Then adopt the correct posture, sitting up straight
on your seat, in the full or half vajra posture, or however is most comfortable, with your
hands resting in the posture of equanimity, with a gentle and evenly balanced gaze, and
so on. Then examine your mindstream very carefully: if you notice any strong thoughts or
emotions that prevent your mind from resting in stillness—feelings such as desire, anger,
malice, pride or confusion—then apply the appropriate antidote, such as meditating on unattractiveness,
love, compassion, analyzing the psycho-physical elements (dhātu), interdependent
origination, the inhalation and exhalation of breath and so on, in order to make your
mind more workable. Then, when the mind is ready to focus on its particular object, you can
begin the actual practice of śamatha meditation.

The traditions based on scriptural sources and the pith instructions mention countless methods
of meditation, but here let us follow the classical sources and mention first of all the
nine ways of resting the mind in order to accomplish the one-pointed mind of the desire
realm.

The Ornament of Mahāyāna Sūtras says:

Placing the attention on an object of focus,Remain with that and do not be distracted.Quickly
recognizing distraction whenever it occurs,Settle the mind on its object once again. Increasingly,
those with intelligent minds,Should gather and focus their attention.Then, in order
to experience real qualities,Mind must be controlled in samādhi. Seeing the disadvantages
of distraction,Dislike for meditation is pacified.Covetousness, mental discomfort and
so onAre pacified in the same way. The diligent practitioner settles the mindWith some application
of effort.Finally it happens naturally and spontaneously,Through familiarity, without
applying effort.

As this says, you place your attention one-pointedly on a given object of focus, and remain
with single-pointed attention focused on the clear image that arises in the mind. Then you
sustain this image continually, without becoming distracted by anything else. Whenever any
distraction does occur, however gross or subtle, you should recognize it immediately with
watchful awareness, and settle the attention once again on the object of focus. Not being
satisfied with some slight stillness of mind, you have to eradicate even the most subtle
tendency towards distraction, and rest in one-pointed concentration. If you experience fatigue
and lack of enthusiasm for samādhi, then reflect on the qualities of the buddhas and
bodhisattvas in general, and in particular the qualities such as the supercognitions and
miraculous abilities which arise through the power of samādhi, and generate enthusiasm for
the practice. Should you begin to take pleasure in busyness or anything that is not conducive
to stillness of mind, reflect on the faults of samsara in general and especially the
faults of losing your way and remaining in your ordinary state. Recognizing the faults of
distraction and busyness, pacify the mind’s excitement. Whenever any states of mind which
prevent samādhi, such as covetousness, mental discomfort, excitement, regret, sleepiness or
lethargy, malice, longing for objects of desire, hesitation and so on arise, pacify them
by applying an appropriate antidote. You will extend the period of stillness in this way,
yet as long as there is still some concern about dullness or agitation arising in the mind,
and the need to deliberately apply an antidote, that is still the eighth stage of resting
the mind. When there is no longer any need to apply an antidote out of expectation or concern
regarding something to be abandoned or its remedy, and you can remain spontaneously
in a state of stillness for as long as you wish, that is the ninth stage of resting the mind,
the one-pointed mind of the desire realm. This is genuine śamatha, but if you still do
not have the bliss of physical and mental pliancy, you have not yet reached the actual preparatory
stage for the dhyāna meditations.

Once pliancy is attained, there is a foundation for developing the wisdom of vipaśyanā. This
is the preparatory stage which is known as ‘the capable stage.’ At this point, there are
seven mental processes through which the main part of dhyāna meditation is accomplished.

Firstly, there is the mental process of precisely discerning characteristics, in which one understands
the positive and negative qualities of the three realms and their respective causes,
the mental afflictions of the different levels of existence as well as the special qualities
of dhyāna meditation.

Secondly, there is the mental process of conviction, which is the confident belief arising out
of this meditation that the flaws of the lower levels should be discarded, while the qualities
of the higher levels should be attained.

Then, the mental process of thorough separation involves discarding the coarser type of thoughts
that should be abandoned by applying the antidote to the mental afflictions of a lower
plane of existence.

When one is freed from these mental afflictions of a lower stage, one attains the joy and physical
wellbeing of mental and physical pliancy, and this is known as the mental process of
gaining joy.

The mental process of examination means that while the mind is abiding at a particular level,
the mental afflictions of the level below should not arise, and so one deliberately focuses
on a given object and carefully examines the mind, abandoning any afflictions that do
develop.

The mental process of the culmination of engagement is the unimpeded path during which the antidote
that overcomes the subtle mental afflictions of the lower level arises in the mind.

The mental process of the result of the culmination of engagement is the path of total release,
at which point there is no longer any need to apply an antidote, the mental afflictions
of the lower level having been totally eradicated.

This is how the mind of the main dhyāna practice is accomplished.

The first dhyāna level which is accomplished in this way has five features: conception, discernment,
joy, physical wellbeing and samādhi.

The second dhyāna, which is even more peaceful, has four features: the perfect clarity in which
conception and discernment have been relinquished, joy, physical wellbeing and samādhi.

The third dhyāna, which is more peaceful still, has five features: equanimity in which the concept
of joy has been abandoned, mindfulness, watchful awareness, physical wellbeing and
samādhi.

The fourth dhyāna, which is called the ultimate dhyāna because it is yet more peaceful, has
four features: the neutral sensation in which the sensation of physical wellbeing has been
abandoned, mindfulness, the mental formation of equanimity, and samādhi.

That is just a brief description of the four dhyānas. I have not mentioned here their particular
characteristics in detail, nor have I gone into the ways of meditating on the formless
absorptions, for fear that this would make the text excessively long, and also because there
seems little need for it. Those who are interested can consult the texts of the abhidharma
or the prajñāpāramitā.

Whichever type of samādhi one is cultivating, the following factors are important to bear in
mind. There are five faults related to meditation: laziness, forgetting the object of focus,
dullness and agitation, not applying the antidote due to being too relaxed, and applying
the antidote again and again because one is too tightly focused and not content simply
to rest. The antidotes to these are known as the eight applications. Confident trust in the
qualities of samādhi, the aspiration to attain these qualities, the consistent and dedicated
diligence that these two inspire, and the blissful pliancy that develops as a result
are the four antidotes to laziness. Mindfulness is the antidote to forgetfulness. Watchful
awareness is the antidote to dullness and agitation. The antidote to under-application is
to apply the antidote, bringing to mind the reasons for practising śamatha and vipaśyanā,
as a means to overcome dullness and agitation, and equanimity is the antidote to over-application.
It is through these that the mind of meditation is attained.

Once the mind of meditative concentration has been accomplished in this way, if one analyzes
‘the four gateways to the vision of reality’—the aggregates, psycho-physical elements, sense
sources and interdependent origination—using the valid logic of ultimate reasoning, such
as the analysis of neither one nor many, and then remains one-pointedly in the ‘non-finding’
of anything at all, that becomes the unity of śamatha and vipaśyanā, which is the great
approach leading to the path of the noble ones and the complete uprooting of saṃsāric
existence. Besides this, the various methods for practising śamatha and vipaśyanā connected
with the profound pith instructions, whether the gradual approach or the direct ‘bypassing’
approach, should be learned only from oral instructions.

The entrance to the path leading to the peace of liberation,Is the samādhi in which śamatha
and vipaśyanā are united.This clear and brief instruction on how it is accomplishedWas written
and offered from an isolated practice hermitage,

By the buddhist monk named Pema Vajra,To fulfil the wishes of the diligent yogini Wangmo.Through
this merit, may the realization of the paths and levels increase,And our own and others’
welfare be accomplished spontaneously!

May it be virtuous!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2005.

Abhidharmakośa (Treasury of Abhidharma), VI, 5.  ↩Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra (Engaging in the Conduct
of a Bodhisattva), VIII, 4.  ↩